---
layout: editions_two-columns
title: Collating Moby&#8211;Dick&#58; Expurgations and Revision Narratives
permalink: /expurgating-moby-dick

---

Collation is the comparing of versions of a work in order to determine
textual differences, and it is a crucial first step in building an
edition's reading text, regardless of editorial approach. Collation is
generally associated with the recording of "variants" in versions of
authorized works only, but fluid-text editing also extends the process
to examining differences between the edition's "originating" work and
the sources that precede it and adaptations that follow.

Editors collate the texts of different editions of the same work, even
different printings of the same edition, in order to discern variants,
that is textual changes that authors, editors, and printers might
introduce into the work, as it evolves over time through the publishing
process. Often these variations are accidental typographical errors, but
authors, editors, even printers also intervene making substantive
changes that affect the meaning of a line, passage, or work. Because
many changes represent a writer's evolving text, they are not strictly
speaking "variants" from a single intended or definitive wording but
evidence of shifting intentions.

#### Changes in *Moby-Dick*: Authorial Revision & Editorial Expurgation.

The differences between the American and British first editions of
*Moby-Dick* range from minor to momentous. The British edition not only
corrected American typos—for instance, "fearfnlly" (p. 198, l. 25) or
"warbrobe" (p. 447, l.7)—but also made scores of meaningful changes,
visible only by comparing the American and British texts. Most changes
are editorial interventions: either conversions to British spelling and
punctuation or expurgations of sexual, religious, or political content.
But since Melville had a chance, during his proofreading of the American
sheets he sent to England, to alter his own text, the British edition
changes also include some of Melville's nuanced revisions. Accordingly,
the first problem confronting us is whether a textual variant is, in
fact, an authorial *revision* or editorial *expurgation*.

For example, in his last encounter with Moby Dick, Ahab, in the American
edition, can "*discover* no sign" of the white whale (Ch. 133), but, in
the British edition, the verb is changed to "*perceive*." The difference
is meaningful because Ahab's inability to *perceive* suggests a
blindness that prevents him from being able to "read" the signs of his
doom. Since no direct evidence shows Melville's hand correcting the
American *discover* to the British *perceive*, we can only surmise that
this variant is Melville's revision. It is possible that Bentley's
editor Henry Milton made the change, but we also must ask why a
copy-editor would presume or even want to make such a non-grammatical,
non-political, non-sexual, non-heretical change? Chances are that
Melville revised the word in proofs. An easier case has to do with a
footnote that appears in the British edition but not in the American.
The note explains the American usage of the forgotten British whaling
term "gallied" (Ch. 87), and it only Melville had the expertise to add
it, explicitly for British readers, lecturing them on his country's
democratic preservation of an Anglo-Saxonism that his monarchic British
cousins had allowed themselves to forget.

The more extreme editorial interventions, the British expurgations of
*Moby-Dick*, constitute a broad range of textual difference, from the
stylistic disparities between a class-defying Melville and his more
conservative editor to the larger cultural contradictions between
antebellum America and Victorian England. For instance, whereas in
Chapter 1 of the American *Moby-Dick*, Ishmael uses slave diction
comically to proclaim "Who aint a slave," the British *Whale* elevates
him in class by having him say, in humorless proper grammar, "Who is not
a slave?" Chapter 25—a brief satire on the pomp of monarchs—was too
much teasing for British readers, and Bentley (or Milton) had it removed
entirely. Perhaps the most devastating cut is of Ishmael's lines toward
the end of "The Whiteness of the Whale" (Ch. 42) that manages to offend
by combining the sexual and blasphemous in one blow: "all deified Nature
absolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover nothing but
the charnel-house within." Apparently, equating god's nature to a whore
would not sit well with British readers, or so Melville's British editor
surmised, and the line was cut. The British expurgations are obvious
provocations for closer reading and interpretation of Melville's text,
but only if authorial revisions—like the addition of *gallied* and the
change from *discover* to *perceive*—and the unauthorized editorial
intervention can be visualized through collation and explained in
revision narratives offering plausible and alternative scenarios.

#### MEL's Collation & Revision Narrative Project.

MEL continues to develop collation protocols for each MEL edition and
enhanced digital technologies involving collation and annotation. MEL's
Reading Text of *Moby-Dick* is a digitization of Bryant and Springer's
Longman critical edition, which is itself a lightly edited and minimally
modified version of the first American edition's text. Like the Longman
edition, MEL highlights substantive authorial changes and editorial
expurgations found in the British edition, and these highlighted changes
are drawn from collations of the American and British texts recorded in
the Textual Apparatus of the 1988 Northwestern-Newberry of *Moby-Dick*.
Longman's revision narratives are also featured as pop-up revision
annotations in the MEL's Reading Text for *Moby-Dick*. In short, MEL's
display and annotation of expurgations are not derived from immediate
digital collation,

However, in the works is an added editorial feature that digitally
collates the American and British texts, automatically highlights
textual differences, and enables editors to add revision narratives to
any given highlighted change for display online, in addition to our
*Moby-Dick* reading text. In keeping with fluid-text protocols, this
collation and annotation feature would allow multiple narratives for any
given expurgation site, thus encouraging users to engage in different
perspectives on the interpretive nature of authorized and unauthorized
revision.

Not surprisingly, collation is an arduous task. In the past, it has been
performed by hand, or rather by the eyes of proofreaders comparing both
texts, and drawing up lists of variants. Digital technologies (such as
Juxta Collation) now perform collations of transcriptions of texts in
variant versions instantaneously, significantly reducing the labor
needed to bring textual revision and versions to light. But digital
collations are only as accurate as the underlying digital transcriptions
of the manuscript or print works being collated. Once manuscript leaves
or print pages have been digitized—that is, converted into digital
images—then the text appearing in each image must also be converted
into digital text, either by hand or automatically through "optical
character recognition" (OCR) technology. And since digital
transcriptions are themselves subject to human or machine error, they
must still be proofread visually against the original leaves and pages
or the digitized images of them. In short, while digital collation is
automatic, digital transcription is not.

MEL's editorial staff employs these and other modes of transcription and
collation in building our model editions. For *Billy Budd*, we used
TextLab for the digitally assisted manual transcription and coding of
the manuscript. For *Moby-Dick*, each version was transcribed, with
minimal TEI encoding, from digital images of the American and British
first editions supplied by the University of Virginia Library's special
collections. See [*Moby-Dick* Side-by-Side](
https://mel.netlify.app/moby-dick-side-by-side) for more details on
these two volumes. Each book was "double-keyed" by Aptara, Inc.—that
is, typed twice by different keyboarders—and the two were collated
in-house to detect keyboarding errors. For *Typee* and "Benito Cereno,"
we use the OCR transcription approach mentioned above.

MEL's efforts in developing a process and display for collation and
revision narrative annotation is in transition. Initially, our collation
of the American and British versions was achieved through Juxta
Collation technology that had been incorporated into an earlier instance
of TextLab. This chapter by chapter collation of the two editions
included a pop-up feature enabling editors to compose revision
narratives for highlighted variants and revisions. The revision
narrative feature assisted editors in discerning Melville's revisions
from British editing and expurgation and in annotating their possible
causes and effects. An enhanced version of this feature is slated in the
development of Juxta Editions newest iteration, FairCopy. For
screenshots of the earlier collation/annotation prototype, click on <a
href="pdf/British-American-Textual-Collation.pdf/"
target="_blank">American and British editions collation</a>. For a
trial collation involving adaptation, click on <a
href="pdf/bradbury-melville-collation.pdf/"
target="_blank">Bradbury screenplay and American edition</a>.
