---
layout: archive_two-columns
title: Moby&#45;dick Side&#45;by&#45;Side&#58; The American And British First Editions
permalink: /moby-dick-side-by-side
 
---
 
The American and British first editions (published within a month of
each other) are radically different, both as books and as texts, and the
reasons for these differences offer concrete evidence of a fluid text
and fascinating glimpses into Melville's creative process, the demands
of editors, and nineteenth-century book history.

Copy-right laws giving writers and publishers some degree of ownership
of the works they printed were, during Melville's lifetime, restricted to nations. As a result, writers of works in English on both sides of the
Atlantic were vulnerable to the practice known as "piracy" in which
unauthorized publishers reprinted their work without providing
royalties. A much-lobbied-for international copy-right law—Dickens was
particularly vocal on the matter—designed to protect writers from
unauthorized reprints did not come about until the 1890s.

In the meantime, and to reduce the impact of the pirating of his
publications, Melville followed what had become the standard practice of
arranging for the near-simultaneous publication of *Moby-Dick* first in
England and then the US. To do this, he had his novel typeset as a
single volume in New York City in the summer of 1851 but withheld
publication of it in the US until after the British version was
released.

To publish the three-volume British version, Melville sent a set of the
American proof sheets, which included some corrections and revisions of
his own (for the sake of British readers), to Richard Bentley in London,
who instructed Henry Milton to copy-edit the American sheets, adapting
it to British usage and Bentley's house style. Milton also expurgated
the text in over 200 places. In going to press, Bentley's edition
famously omitted Melville's Epilogue, in which we learn that Ishmael is
the only survivor of the *Pequod* shipwreck. Much to Melville's chagrin
over the expurgation of some of the novel's most memorable poetic prose,
British reviewers (who did not have the Epilogue) were also quick to
note the formal impossibility of the death of the novel's first-person
narrator. Also bungled in the British production is the placement of
Etymology and Extracts at the end of Volume 3, instead of its place at
the front of the single-volume American version. Also, the British
version is titled *The Whale; or, Moby Dick*; whereas the American
title is *Moby-Dick*; *or, The Whale*. The Epilogue omission, Etymology
/ Extracts misplacement, and title discrepancy are likely to have been
the consequence of confusions arising from the shipment of proofs to England. The
British version appeared in October 1851; the American in November.
Melville's proof sheets with their corrections and slight modifications
(which came too late in the process to be added to the already printed
but not distributed American text) and Milton's copy-editing, revisions,
and cuts have not been located. They can only be discerned through collation, made accessible through editing, and analyzed through revision argumentation

The difference in title in the British and American titles reflects a
late change of mind on Melville's part. When he sent his proofs to
Bentley the novel was simply *The Whale*, but an undated draft of a
letter from Melville's brother and literary agent Allan Melville to
Richard Bentley, requesting a title change to *Moby-Dick; or, The
Whale*, came too late for Bentley to make the change; he had already
advertised the original title. Exactly when Melville changed his mind is
not certain. But the appearance of "The Town-Ho's Story" (Ch. 54) as a
pre-publication excerpt from "The Whale" in the October 1851 issue of
*Harper's New Monthly Magazine* indicates that Melville had held onto
this title into late September, about the time that Bentley had already
arranged for his early October advertisements of *The Whale*.
Nevertheless, Bentley was able to insert a half-title page, in Volume 1
only, that reads *The Whale; or, Moby Dick.* The subtitle omits the
hyphen in the American title *Moby-Dick*. Even this difference has
meaning, for in modern usage—both scholarly and now popularly—the
hyphenated *Moby-Dick* designates the book; the unhyphenated "Moby Dick"
represents the white whale.

In light of these differences, modern scholars agree that the American
edition text (though it came one month later than the British) more
fully represents Melville's intentions before he released his text to
printers, editors, and publishers. That said, the British text mingles
Melville's last-minute revisions with the British expurgations, all of
which have interpretive value especially regarding *Moby-Dick*'s first,
transatlantic readerships.

Readers can inspect the differing physical features and print texts of
the American and British first editions in our side-by-side display
above. To move to the front and back matter of each book, or to the
beginning of a chapter, select the appropriate section or chapter number
and title in the drop-down menu below each edition. Users can also flip
page by page through either edition by clicking the left or right arrow
on the page frame; they can skip ahead or back by clicking the dots
below the frames.

These two books constitute the physical evidence of *Moby-Dick* as a
fluid text. However, a closer inspection of the works textual fluidities
requires digital collation of the texts of the two versions, a process
discussed in the following introductory link. Readers can also find
expurgations discussed in revision annotations in MEL's *Moby-Dick*
Reading Text.

*MEL's images of the first American edition of Moby-Dick and of the
first British edition of The Whale are digitally reproduced from
copies—with the call numbers PS2384.M6 1851 and PS2384.M6 1851a v.1-3,
respectively—in the Clifton Waller Barrett Library of American
Literature, Herman Melville Collection, in Special Collections of
University of Virginia Library. The texts of the American and British
editions used for MEL's collation of the two versions were transcribed
with minimal TEI coding by Aptara, Inc. from these two copies.*